Add my post - Learn JavaScript concepts by building a random quote generator (#25)
iamshadmirza/TheNextBigWriter: js/Learn JavaScript concepts by building a random quote generator.md

Learning JavaScript is fun. But What's the point if you are not building stuff with it.
So in this article, we will learn javascript basic concepts and create a random quote generator of our own.

I assume you have a basic knowledge of HTML and CSS  as the main objective of this article is to learn javascript. Else you can check these tutorials on [HTML](https://youtu.be/UB1O30fR-EE) and [CSS](https://youtu.be/yfoY53QXEnI). I will try to explain everything in detail and by the time you finish this lesson, you will have an understanding of concepts like strings, arrays, functions, event listeners, template literals in JavaScript. So let's begin.

## Getting started
Lets first create three different files in our folder as 
- index.html for creating the UI and displaying the content,
- style.css to make it attractive by adding styles.
- script.js will contain the actual code which makes our app work.

> ## 1. creating the content of the app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. Create the content for the app
```

> The first step is to create a UI. Here is our index.html file look like 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step is to create a UI. Here is how our index.html file will look like 
```

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
<head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8">
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css">
    <link rel="shortcut icon" href="icons/favicon.png">
    <title>Random quote</title>
</head>
<body>
    <div class="content">
        <div class="card">
          <h2>Random quote</h2>
          <p>wanna see a random quote ?</p>
          <!--button to display random quote-->

>           <button class="btn">Generate</button>

Reviewer: add `onclick` here only to keep things simple for new comers?

        </div>
        <div id="quote">
         <!--Quote will be displayed here.-->
        </div>
    </div>
</body>
<script src="script.js"></script>
</html>
```

![Screenshot (238).png](https://cdn.hashnode.com/res/hashnode/image/upload/v1585025931498/AIvbN-aiu.png)

And this is how it looks like in the browser. Wait a minute, It doesn't look nice right. 

> ## 2. Styling the content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 2. Style the content
```

Let's make it appealing by adding our style.css file

```css
body{background-color: indigo;  margin:auto;}
h2{background-color: #1c1c1c; color:#ffffff;
padding:10px;
font-family: arial;
text-align: center;}

.btn{height:50px; width:150px;
font-size: 18px;
color:#ffffff;
background-color: dodgerblue;
border:none;
padding:5px;
border-radius: 5px;}

.card{padding:15px 30px 15px 30px;
margin:40px auto;
max-width:500px;
max-height:300px;
text-align: center;
background-color: #ffffff;
border-radius: 5px;
} 

p{font-family:'Segoe UI';
font-weight:400;
font-size: 20px;}

img{height:25px;
width:25px;

> }

Reviewer: Can you just format this CSS file so it becomes more readable, like parenthesis, line-breaks and stuff?

```
And boom ! this looks great now.

![Screenshot (240).png](https://cdn.hashnode.com/res/hashnode/image/upload/v1585027409630/ZG-vq7LdP.png)

> Now let's think about how we are going to make it work. We need to figure out a way to display random quotes after clicking a button. And We will go with the simplest way to do it. How? let's see.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's think about how we are going to make it work. We need to figure out a way to display random quotes after clicking a button. And we will go just with the simplest approach in a moment.
```

> Forget coding. let's just think about what we have to do. 
> okay. First, we will need quotes. We will have to store them somewhere and do something such that we can display a random quote after clicking a button. That's it. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't think about coding right now. Let's just think about what we want to achieve. So first we will need quotes. We will have to store them somewhere and do something such that we can display a random quote after clicking a button. That's it. 
```

> ## 3. let's learn some javaScript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 3. Let's learn some JavaScript
```

### Strings

> 
A string is a sequence of one or more characters that may consist of letters, numbers, or symbols. Strings in JavaScript are primitive data types which we are going to use to create quotes.

In JavaScript, there are three ways to write strings. They can be written inside single quotes (' '), double quotes (" "), or backticks (` `). 
Strings with backticks(``) are called template literals which we will learn later.

```javascript
'This is a string'
```
So all our quotes are basically strings like this.
```
'Stay hungry, stay foolish !'
```
 But there are multiple such strings and we need something to store them. Here comes the concept of Arrays. But what's an array?

### Arrays

> 
An array in JavaScript is a type of global object that is used to store data. Arrays consist of an ordered collection or list containing zero or more data types, and use numbered indices starting from 0 to access specific items.
 
```

> <!--Creating an array-->

Reviewer: remove this comment from this line?

let quotes =[];
```

> Arrays can contain any data type, including numbers, strings, and objects. We will be storing our strings in an array like this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We just created an empty array above. Arrays can contain any data type, including numbers, strings, and objects. We will be storing our strings in an array like this.
```

```javascript
let quotes=[
'The secret to life is to love who you are.',
'Look for opportunities in every change in your life.',
'Persist while others are quitting.',
'and so on.'
];
```
### Array.length
The length property of an object which is an instance of type Array sets or returns the number of elements in that array.

> ```
> quotes.length;
> <!--Output-->
> 4
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```javascript
quotes.length; // Output: 4
```
```

#### Accessing Items in an Array
An item in a JavaScript array is accessed by referring to the index number of the item in square brackets.
```javascript
quotes[2];
<!--Output : -->
Persist while others are quitting.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```javascript
quotes[2]; // Output: Persist while others are quitting.
```
```

### Math.random() 
The Math.random() function returns a floating-point, pseudo-random number in the range 0 to less than 1. See how it returns every time we call it in the console.

![Screenshot (243).png](https://cdn.hashnode.com/res/hashnode/image/upload/v1585151170351/FFMTnGRBt.png)

But this is not what we want. We want a whole number and not a floating type. For this, the Math object provides another method called Math.floor()

### Math.floor()
Math.floor() returns a number representing the largest integer less than or equal to the specified number. So if we pass the math.random() as a parameter to math.floor() we will get a whole number.
But Math.floor() is always rounding down to the nearest decimal, therefore, every decimal between 0 and 1 will always revert back to 0.

![Screenshot (245).png](https://cdn.hashnode.com/res/hashnode/image/upload/v1585047247928/aNY04WDp2.png)

In order to get a random number between 0 to the length of our array, we will multiply the math.random() by quotes.length. 
Finally the random index we want is 
```javascript
let index=Math.floor(Math.random()*quotes.length);
<!--This will give a random quote-->
quotes[index];

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```javascript
let index = Math.floor(Math.random() * quotes.length); // returns a random number that will be stored in our index variable
quotes[index]; // Output: return quote at the `index`
```
```

index will always generate a valid array index number for our quotes array.
So we figured out how to retrieve a random quote from the quotes array. But we don't want to display just a string. We are going to do it nicely using template literals.

### Template Literals
> 
The Template Literal, introduced in ES6, is a new way to create a string. With it comes new features that allow us more control over dynamic strings in our programs.

Template literals are string literals allowing embedded expressions. It can contain placeholders. These are indicated by the dollar sign and curly braces (${expression}).
```
`string text ${expression} string text`;
```

### HTML Templates
With the ability to have multi-line strings and use Template Expressions to add content into our string, this makes it really nice to use for HTML templates in our code. So we will create a HTML template for our quote and store it in a variable. We used the placeholder to pass our quotes in the template.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```javascript
```

let index=Math.floor(Math.random()*quotes.length);

//display the quote of that index
let div=document.querySelector('#quote');
let quote=`<div class="card">
<img src="icons/favicon.png">
<p>${quotes[index]}</p>
<img src="icons/favicon.png">
</div>
`;
div.innerHTML=quote;
}
```
We are almost done. Just need to invoke this displayQuote function whenever we click the generate button.

### Events in javaScript
Events are actions that take place in the browser that can be initiated by either the user or the browser itself. 
Like in our case it's when the user clicks the generate button.

### Event listeners
An event listener watches for an event on an element. We will use the addEventListener() method to listen for the event. addEventListener() takes two mandatory parameters . 
- the event it is listening for 
- and the listener callback function.

```javascript
target.addEventListener(type, listener [, options]);
```
We have a button element with class="btn". The click event will call the displayQuote function every time we click on the button and display a random quote.

```javascript
let btn=document.querySelector('.btn');
btn.addEventListener('click', displayQuote);

> 

Reviewer: what if instead of using event listeners you add an `onclick` method on the button and call this function? This will help keep things simple and in the scope of this post.
